Daily Responsibilities:
1) Check the Shift Handover.
2) Check for any task continuity support needed.
3) Verify the Ticket Queue
4) Check the mails
5) Perform Health Checks (Critical Servers)
6) Perform any Change Requests during your shift (if any scheduled).
7) In an Offshore-Onsite model, attending Status Calls.
Health Checks:
1) Instance running or not
2) Agent running or not
3) Reading Error/Agent Logs
4) Checking Backups
5) Checking disk space
6) HA Synchronization/failure checks
7) Event Viewer
8) SQL Server settings
9) Database settings
10) High availability checks (failing (or) not)
11) SQL Server Error logs
12) Storage
q 
394
These are the task list that must be done by a DBA on daily basis.
1) Check System Event Logs and SQL Server Error Logs for unusual events.
2) Verify that all scheduled jobs have run successfully.
3) Confirm that backups have been made successfully and moved to the backup storage or 
secure location.
4) Monitor disk space to make sure SQL Servers will not run out of disk space.
5) Periodically monitor performance of database and system using both System Monitor and 
SQL Server Profiler.
6) Monitor and identify blocking issues.
7) Keep a log of any changes you make to servers, instance setting, database setting and 
monitoring script.
8) Create SQL Server alerts to notify you of problems, and e-mailed to you. Take action as 
needed.
9) Regularly restore backups to a test server in order to verify that you can restore them.
Monthly Check list?
1. Make a list of all SA passwords for each server it in secure place.
2. Make a list of all the passwords for each login crated on the production boxes.
3. We save the SQL Servers and Windows configuration information in secure place. This 
information is needed to rebuild an NT& SQL Server box in case of a disaster
4. Perform a test restore of a database backup. This is done in order to prepare for 
unforeseen situations.
5. We save information about any changes made to a server – hardware or software.
6. Maintain system logs in a secure fashion. Keep records of all service packs installed for 
both Microsoft Windows NT Server and Microsoft SQL Server. Keep records of network 
libraries used, the security mode, SA passwords and service accounts.
7. Valid that no error messages are generated during the restore process.
8. Set the MSSQL and SQL Server Agent services to Auto-Start when the server starts.

DBA Maintains Activities:
Daily Maintaince: Differential backup, Transaction log backup, Blocking jobs, CPU Utilization
History cleanup job

Weekly Maintaince: Full backup, Rebuild indexes, Reorganize index, DBCC Checkdb, Purging 
jobs, 
Monthly Maintaince: Patch management, Backup file testing 

Yearly Maintaince: DR Testing, BCP plan

Change Management:
Change Management Tool 
BMC Remedy
CPMS: Change Process Management Service
➢ Change Management is introducing modifications to an existing environment 
➢ It’s a planned activity 
➢ Its having 3 stages
❖ Normal Changes (CR)::: Ex: File movement, adding file, changing memory 
parameters, High availability configurations…
❖ Standard Changes (S-CR) ::: Patch management, DR Testing
❖ Emergency Changes (E-CR) ::: disk full ,100% cpu utilization, log file full, 
Database\Sql service down, Master database down
Change Management Process:
1. Get all the requirements including down time details from apps team
2. Raise a change as per the plan
3. Once change raise, pull all technical steps including pre-installation, implementation, 
and verification and backout plan.
4. Once completed, get technical side approval
5. Once approved, get SDM Approval.[Delivery manager approval\client approval]
6. After implement the change as per implementation date and finish as per the time lines.
7. Once implement success then Change is success else failed.
Change States:
Raise Change> Impact assessment> File the technical steps> Pass for technical approval> Pass 
to SDM approval> Once Approved,
Problem Management:
Repetitive or Recurring issues we can fix by using “Problem Management”
➢ Problem Management handles recurring incidents. Problem Management Naming 
convention is ‘PRB’
➢ Identify the causes, resolve if it is from root
➢ Generally Sr.L3/L4 will be doing problem management
➢ For every Problem once it is resolved requires a RCA (Root cause analysis )
Note: PB tickets handled by Pb management coordinators by setting up the call, getting 
updates from all team. On time all members should provide the correct updates.
Capacity planning\management:
➢ Forecasting the growth of database is called Capacity planning.
➢ It is nothing but a Disk planning
➢ Volume reporting is giving 1 month is estimation report and it is given to 1 year to 
allocated the disk space
Server\Database Hardening rules: Harding is to protect the server from threats
Harding is to protect the server from threats
Rules:
1. Remove un necessary roles to the users\logins
2. Provide strong sa password 
3. Disable built-in administrator account
4. Remove unnecessary users\logins
5. Always create instead of individual logins create groups
BCP (Business continuity Plan) Plan:
➢ BCP is to defines and perform the day-to-day operations at multiple locations.
➢ If one server is down then another server is do the process
➢ Every year once one resource move to another location and work from there, and end 
of the same day has to provide a clear BCP team and again this is ITIL process.
RCA (Root Cause Analysis) Plan:
➢ This is related to Problem management
➢ In root cause analysis 
❖ Issue/problem
❖ Solution
❖ Measurement
❖ Mitigate not to happen again the same issue in server.

RACI Matrix: Defines Roles and responsibilities from each team which relate to each team.

❖ R- Responsibility
❖ A-Accountable
❖ C-Consult
❖ I-Inform
➢ RACI is a simple Excel sheet

